188. Without are pleasant garden glades, flowing fountains, pure refreshing lakes, with every kind of flower, and trees w
ith fruit, arranged in rows, deep shade beneath.189. There, too, are various kinds of wondrous birds, flying and sportin
g in the midst, and on the surface of the water the four kinds of flowers, bright colour’d, giving out their floating sc
ent;

190. Minstrel maidens cause their songs, and chorded music, to invite the prince. He, hearing the sounds of singing, sigh
s for the pleasures of the garden shades,191. And cherishing within these happy thoughts, he dwelt upon the joys of an o
utside excursion; even as the chained elephant ever longs for the free desert wilds.

192. The royal father, hearing that the prince would enjoy to wander through the gardens, first ordered all his attendant
officers to adorn and arrange them, after their several offices:

193. To make level and smooth the king’s highway, to remove from the path all offensive matter, all old persons, diseased
or deformed, all those suffering through poverty or great grief,194. So that his son in his present humour might see no
thing likely to afflict his heart.

The adornments being duly made, the prince was invited to an audience;195. The king seeing his son approach, patted his h
ead and looking at the colour of his face, feelings of sorrow and joy intermingled, bound him. His mouth willing to spea
k, his heart restrained.

196. (Now see) the jewel-fronted gaudy chariot; the four equally-pacing, stately horses; good-tempered and well-trained; 
young and of graceful appearance;197. Perfectly pure and white, and draped with flowery coverings. In the same chariot s
tands the (stately) driver;

the streets were scattered over with flowers; precious drapery fixed on either side of the way,198. With dwarfed trees li
ning the road, costly vessels employed for decoration, hanging canopies and variegated banners, silken curtains, moved b
y the rustling breeze,

199. Spectators arranged on either side of the path. With bodies bent and glistening eyes, eagerly gazing, but not rudely
staring, as the blue lotus flower (they bent) drooping in the air,

200. Ministers and attendants flocking round him, as stars following the chief of the constellation; all uttering the sam
e suppressed whisper of admiration, at a sight so seldom seen in the world;

201. Rich and poor, humble and exalted, old and young and middle-aged, all paid the greatest respect, and invoked blessin
gs on the occasion:

202. So the country-folk and the town-folk, hearing that the prince was coming forth, the well-to-do not waiting for thei
r servants, those asleep and awake not mutually calling to one another,

203. The six kinds of creatures not gathered together and penned, the money not collected and locked up, the doors and ga
tes not fastened, all went pouring along the way on foot;

204. The towers were filled and the mounds by the trees, the windows and the terraces along the streets; with bent body f
earing to lift their eyes, carefully seeing that there was nothing about them to offend,

205. Those seated on high addressing those seated on the ground, those going on the road addressing those passing on high
, the mind intent on one object alone; so that if a heavenly form had flown past,206. Or a form entitled to highest resp
ect, there would have been no distraction visible,

so intent was the body and so immovable the limbs. And now beautiful as the opening lily,207. He advances towards the gar
den glades, wishing to accomplish the words of the holy prophet (Rishi).

