718. ’The sumptuously ornamented and splendid palace (I look upon) as filled with fire; the hundred dainty dishes (tastes
) of the divine kitchen, as mingled with destructive poisons;719. ’The lily growing on the tranquil lake, in its midst h
arbours countless noisome insects;

and so the towering abode of the rich is the house of calamity; the wise will not dwell therein.720. ’In former times ill
ustrious kings, seeing the many crimes of their home and country, affecting as with poison the dwellers therein, in sorr
owful disgust sought comfort in seclusion;

721. ’We know, therefore, that the troubles of a royal estate are not to be compared with the repose of a religious life;
far better dwell in the wild mountains, and eat the herbs like the beasts of the field;722. ’Therefore I dare not dwell
in the wide palace, for the black snake has its dwelling there.

I reject the kingly estate and the five desires [desires of the senses], to escape such sorrows I wander thro’ the mounta
in wilds.723. ’This, then, would be the consequence of compliance, that I;who, delighting in religion, am gradually gett
ing wisdom, should now quit these quiet woods, and returning home, partake of sensual pleasures,724. ’And thus by night 
and day increase my store of misery. Surely this is not what should be done!

that the great leader of an illustrious tribe, having left his home from love of religion,725. ’And for ever turned his b
ack upon tribal honour, desiring to confirm his purpose as a leader,--that he,--discarding outward form, clad in religio
us garb, loving religious meditation, wandering thro’ the wilds,--

726. ’Should now reject his hermit vestment, tread down his sense of proper shame (and give up his aim). This, though I g
ained heaven’s kingly state, cannot be done! how much less to gain an earthly, though distinguished, home!727. ’For havi
ng spued forth lust, passion, and ignorance, shall I return to feed upon it? as a man might go back to his vomit! such m
isery, how could I bear?

728. ’Like a man whose house has caught fire, by some expedient finds a way to escape, will such a man forthwith go back 
and enter it again? such conduct would disgrace a man!729. ’So I, beholding the evils, birth, old age, and death, to esc
ape the misery, have become a hermit; shall I then go back and enter in, and like a fool dwell in their company?730. ’He
who enjoys a royal estate and yet seeks rescue, cannot dwell thus, this is no place for him; escape (rescue) is born fr
om quietness and rest; to be a king is to add distress and poison;

731. ’To seek for rest and yet aspire to royal condition is but a contradiction, royalty and rescue, motion and rest, lik
e fire and water, having two principles, cannot be united.

732. ’So one resolved to seek escape cannot abide possessed of kingly dignity! and if you say a man may be a king, and at
the same time prepare deliverance for himself,733. ’There is no certainty in this! to seek certain escape is not to ris
k it thus;

it is through this uncertain frame of mind that once a man gone forth is led to go back home again;734. ’But I, my mind i
s not uncertain; severing the baited hook of relationship, with straightforward purpose, I have left my home. Then tell 
me, why should I return again?’

735. The great minister, inwardly reflecting, (thought), ’The mind of the royal prince, my master, is full of wisdom, and
agreeable to virtue, what he says is reasonable and fitly framed.’736. Then he addressed the prince and said: ’Accordin
g to what your highness states,

he who seeks religion must seek it rightly; but this is not the fitting time (for you);737. ’Your royal father, old and o
f declining years, thinking of you his son, adds grief to grief;

you say indeed, "I find my joy in rescue. To go back would be apostacy."738. ’But yet your joy denotes unwisdom, and argu
es want of deep reflection; you do not see, because you seek the fruit, how vain to give up present duty.

739. ’There are some who say, There is "hereafter;" others there are who say, "Nothing hereafter." So whilst this questio
n hangs in suspense, why should a man give up his present pleasure?

740. ’If perchance there is "hereafter," we ought to bear (patiently) what it brings; if you say, "Hereafter is not," the
n there is not either rescue (salvation)!

741. ’If you say, "Hereafter is," you would not say, "Salvation causes it." As earth is hard, or fire is hot, or water mo
ist, or wind is mobile,742. ’"Hereafter" is just so. It has its own distinct nature.

So when we speak of pure and impure, each comes from its own distinctive nature.743. ’If you should say, "By some contriv
ance this can be removed," such an opinion argues folly.

Every root within the moral world (world or domain of conduct) has its own nature predetermined;744. ’Loving remembrance 
and forgetfulness, these have their nature fixed and positive;

so likewise age, disease, and death, these sorrows, who can escape by strategy? (contrivance, upâya).745. ’If you say, "W
ater can put out fire," or "Fire can cause water to boil and pass away," (then this proves only that) distinctive nature
s may be mutually destructive; but nature in harmony produces living things;

