1013. The way opposed to this of ’withered body.’ I should therefore rather seek strength of body, by drink and food refr
esh my members, and with contentment cause my mind to rest.

1014. My mind at rest, I shall enjoy silent composure; composure is the trap for getting ecstasy (dhyâna); whilst in ecst
asy perceiving the true law (right law, i.e. truth), then the force of truth (the law) obtained, disentanglement will fo
llow.

1015. And thus composed, enjoying perfect quiet, old age and death are put away; and then defilement is escaped by this f
irst means; thus then by equal steps the excellent law results from life restored by food and drink.

1016. Having carefully considered this principle, bathing in the Nairañgana river, he desired afterwards to leave the wat
er (pool), but owing to extreme exhaustion was unable to rise;1017. Then a heavenly spirit holding out (pressing down) a
branch, taking this in his hand he (raised himself and) came forth.

At this time on the opposite side of the grove there was a certain chief herdsman,1018. Whose eldest daughter was called 
Nandâ. One of the Suddhavâsa Devas addressing her said, ’Bodhisattva dwells in the grove, go you then, and present to hi
m a religious offering.’

1019. Nandâ Balada (or Balaga or Baladhya) with joy came to the spot, above her hands (i.e. on her wrists) white chalcedo
ny bracelets, her clothing of a grey (bluish) colour (dye);1020. The grey and the white together contrasted in the light
, as the colours of the rounded river bubble;

with simple heart and quicken’d step she came, and, bowing down at Bodhisattva’s feet,1021. She reverently offered him pe
rfumed rice milk, begging him of his condescension to accept it.

Bodhisattva taking it, partook of it (at once), whilst she received, even then, the fruits of her religious act.1022. Hav
ing eaten it, all his members refreshed, he became capable of receiving Bodhi;

his body and limbs glistening with (renewed strength), and his energies swelling higher still,1023. As the hundred stream
s swell the sea, or the first quarter’d moon daily increases in brightness.

The five Bhikshus having witnessed this, perturbed, were filled with suspicious reflection;1024. They supposed (said) tha
t his religious zeal (heart) was flagging, and that he was leaving and looking for a better abode, as though he had obta
ined deliverance, the five elements entirely removed.

1025. Bodhisattva wandered on alone, directing his course to that ’fortunate’ tree, beneath whose shade he might accompli
sh his search after complete enlightenment.1026. (Over) the ground wide and level, producing soft and pliant grass,

easily he advanced with lion step, pace by pace, (whilst) the earth shook withal;1027. And as it shook, Kâla nâga aroused
, was filled with joy, as his eyes were opened to the light.

Forthwith he exclaimed: ’When formerly I saw the Buddhas of old, there was the sign of an earthquake as now;1028. ’The vi
rtues of a Muni are so great in majesty, that the great earth cannot endure them;as step by step his foot treads upon th
e ground, so is there heard the sound of the rumbling earth-shaking;1029. ’A brilliant light now illumes the world, as t
he shining of the rising sun;

five hundred bluish tinted birds (I see), wheeling round to the right, flying through space;1030. ’A gentle, soft, and co
oling breeze blows around in an agreeable way;

all these auspicious (miraculous) signs are the same as those of former Buddhas;1031. ’Wherefore I know that this Bodhisa
ttva will certainly arrive at perfect wisdom.And now, behold! from yonder man, a grass cutter, he obtains some pure and 
pliant grass,1032. ’Which spreading out beneath the tree, with upright body, there he takes his seat; his feet placed un
der him, not carelessly arranged (moving to and fro), but like the firmly fixed and compact body of a Nâga;

1033. ’Nor shall he rise again from off his seat till he has completed his undertaking.’ And so he (the Nâga) uttered the
se words by way of confirmation. The heavenly Nâgas, filled with joy,

