The prince asked his charioteer, ’What sort of man, again, is this?’

229. Replying he said, ’This is a sick man. The four elements all confused and disordered, worn and feeble, with no remai
ning strength, bent down with weakness, looking to his fellow-men for help.’

230. The prince hearing the words thus spoken, immediately became sad and depressed in heart, and asked, ’Is this the onl
y man afflicted thus, or are others liable to the same (calamity)?’

231. In reply he said, ’Through all the world, men are subject to the same condition; those who have bodies must endure a
ffliction, the poor and ignorant, as well as the rich and great.’

232. The prince, when these words met his ears, was oppressed with anxious thought and grief; his body and his mind were 
moved throughout, just as the moon upon the ruffled tide.

233. ’Placed thus in the great furnace of affliction, say! what rest or quiet can there be! Alas! that worldly men, (blin
ded by) ignorance and oppressed with dark delusion,234. ’Though the robber sickness may appear at any time, yet live wit
h blithe and joyous hearts!’

On this, turning his chariot back again, he grieved to think upon the pain of sickness.235. As a man beaten and wounded s
ore, with body weakened, leans upon his staff, so dwelt he in the seclusion of his palace, lone-seeking, hating worldly 
pleasures.

236. The king hearing once more of his son’s return, asked anxiously the reason why, and in reply was told--’he saw the p
ain of sickness.’ The king in fear like one beside himself,237. Roundly blamed the keepers of the way; his heart constra
ined, his lips spoke not;

again he increased the crowd of music women, the sounds of merriment twice louder than aforetime,238. If by these sounds 
and sights (the prince) might be gratified; and indulging worldly feelings, might not hate his home. Night and day the c
harm of melody increased, but his heart was still unmoved by it.

239. The king himself then went forth to observe everything successively, and to make the gardens even yet more attractiv
e, selecting with care the attendant women, that they might excel in every point of personal beauty;240. Quick in wit an
d able to arrange matters well, fit to ensnare men by their winning looks;

he placed additional keepers along the king’s way, he strictly ordered every offensive sight to be removed,241. And earne
stly exhorted the illustrious coachman, to look well and pick out the road as he went.

And now that Deva of the pure abode, again caused the appearance of a dead man;242. Four persons carrying the corpse lift
ed it on high, and appeared (to be going on) in front of Bodhisattva; the surrounding people saw it not, but only Bodhis
attva and the charioteer;

243. (Once more) he asked, ’What is this they carry? with streamers and flowers of every choice description, whilst the f
ollowers are overwhelmed with grief, tearing their hair and wailing piteously.’

244. And now the gods instructing the coachman, he replied and said,

’This is a "dead man," all his powers of body destroyed, life departed; his heart without thought, his intellect disperse
d;245. ’His spirit gone, his form withered and decayed; stretched out as a dead log;family ties broken --all his friends
who once loved him, clad in white cerements,246. ’Now no longer delighting to behold him, remove him to lie in some hol
low ditch (tomb).’

The prince hearing the name of DEATH, his heart constrained by painful thoughts,247. He asked, ’Is this the only dead man
, or does the world contain like instances?’

Replying thus he said, ’All, everywhere, the same; he who begins his life must end it likewise;248. ’The strong and lusty
and the middle-aged, having a body, cannot but decay (and die).’

The prince now harassed and perplexed in mind; his body bent upon the chariot leaning-board,249. With bated breath and st
ruggling accents, stammered thus, ’Oh worldly men! how fatally deluded!

